We're now going to turn our
attention to the key methods
in the ForkJoinTask.
I mentioned before
the two key methods,
which were fork and join.
And now we're going to go and
look at them in more detail.
So first, let's start out with
the structure of ForkJoinTask.
ForkJoinTask implements
future, which
means you can use it as
you would use a future.
In fact, as we saw before,
if you submit a ForkJoinTask
via the Submit
method, you get back
a ForkJoinTask which
could be used as a future.
It's not particularly common
to use the future methods.
But it's much more common to use
the subclass methods that we'll
be talking about here shortly--
things like compute and
fork and join and so on.
Let's start by
talking about fork.
Fork enables a task
to create subtasks--
or create a subtask,
one at the time--
that can be run in parallel
inside the ForkJoinPool.
Here's what fork looks like.
You can see fork
is going to arrange
to execute this
task asynchronously,
either in the current tasks pool
if it comes from something that
is associated with
a particular pool,
or in the ForkJoinPool's
common pool,
if it's not associated
with any particular pool.
So when you fork a task,
if a task is forked,
then it will arrange to
execute in some pool.
Calling fork doesn't
block the caller.
It also doesn't run
the task immediately.
All it does is it goes
ahead and plops that task
into the appropriate deck of
the calling worker thread.
So what happens here-- if you
take a look at what happens,
keep in mind that
whenever fork is called,
fork can only be called in the
context of a worker thread that
is running.
And therefore,
when you call fork
in the context of
that worker thread,
that worker thread will
push the task that's
associated with the
fork call onto the head
of the double-ended queue,
or this deck, work queue,
that's owned by the calling
or the current worker thread.
So that's how things get placed
onto the appropriate work
queue or the deck.
When you call fork,
it always takes place
in the context of a thread.
And that thread then goes
ahead and pushes the task
or the subtask onto its deck.
So that's basically fork.
And then, as we'll
see here later,
if that worker thread
doesn't have anything to do,
it can go ahead and process
the work off of its work queue.
Or if it is busy
doing other things,
then another thread may come
along and steal that work off
the end of its deck.
We'll talk about that
in just a minute.
Join is the other end
of the spectrum, here.
Join is used to
get the result back
of a previously forked
computation when it's finished.
So if you fork
something, then you
go off and do some other stuff.
And later, you can
come back and join it.
And when you come
back to join it,
hopefully it's either
done, in which case
you get it right away--
get its result right away.
Or it may turn out
that it's not yet done.
And so then you end
up logically blocking.
The calling task--
whoever calls block--
that's whoever calls join--
will "block"-- and I
put that in quotes--
until the forked
subtask is done.
Now, as I mentioned
earlier when we
were giving an overview
of ForkJoinTask,
calling join on a task doesn't
actually block the thread.
It doesn't actually
block the worker thread.
It just prevents the control
from going any further
until that task's got a result.
And what will happen
instead, typically,
is that the call to join
will cause the worker
thread to pitch in and do a
bunch of other processing.
And at some point,
either it will
notice that the
results have come back
from the subtasks or the
task that's called join,
or somebody else will notice
this and inform that thread.
And so at some point,
it'll get the result back.
And then it can return the
result back to the caller.
And then the thread, the worker
thread, can continue to run.
This is a little bit complicated
to get your head around
because it's not quite the
same semantics as calling, say,
join on a Java thread--
a native Java thread--
because that really
will block the thread.
This doesn't block the thread.
And the reason it doesn't
block the worker thread--
the reason why this join call
does not block the worker
thread--
is because a ForkJoinTask
is not a thread.
Instead, it's a much
lighter-weight mechanism
that works in a more
collaborative way.
Now, that the join call
defines something known
as a synchronization point.
And this is very important.
And that's because
the computation
that just took place may have
occurred in some other thread.
And we need to be
able to make sure
that when we get
the result back,
we get back the right result--
the right result
being the one that's
been pushed through the
processor caches correctly.
And the reason that it defines
the synchronization point is
to ensure that all the
writes in the worker thread--
all the things that are
doing the processing
in the background that
happened before the join--
are made visible
to other threads--
most importantly, the
thread that called join--
after the join returns.
And this happens-before
relationship
is a very fascinating
topic in concurrency.
It's a very fascinating topic
in the Java memory model.
And if you're
curious about it, I
recommend you go back
to my concurrent object
oriented programming
course where
I talk about the
concept of happens
before relationships
in great detail.
And so this just illustrates
that the ForkJoinTask join
method is a
synchronization point
to make sure that
caches are properly
flushed from computations
that are running
in the background and
other worker threads
in the ForkJoinPool.
The third key method on
ForkJoinTask is invoke.
And what this method does is it
arranges to invoke and perform
the task, awaits the
completion-- basically joining
with it.
And, if necessary,
it returns the result
if it's a return-oriented
operation.
So this is basically a
synchronous two-way call, not
an asynchronous two-way call.
It's a little confusing
to say those phrases.
So it's a synchronous
two-way call.
And it'll actually
block the calling thread
until we get the result back.
Now, again, blocking
is relative.
It'll go ahead and block it
in the sense that join blocks.
It'll do other things
in the background.
But the control
will not continue
until it is able to get
the result back and return
to the caller with
the result. Obviously,
if a runtime exception or an
error exception is thrown,
then it'll pass
back that exception
as normal using the synchronous
Java exception processing
mechanisms.